hey guys it's phil from
smilinggardener.com and today i'm going
to show you to do something called rock
mulching first while I'm standing by my
garden here I might as well show you the
progress things are starting to grow I
have some tomato supports you can see up
around there and there's my little path
and I've got a nice new little sidewalk
in here and things are starting to grow
but still not much exciting going on
it's a little bit too early in the
spring and it's been cold and rainy so
we need some warmth for things to really
start taking off but I'm pretty excited
about this garden this year so rock
mulching you know I don't generally
recommend you using stones or rocks as a
mulch in your garden and the main
problem with that is that they don't let
organic matter be recycled back into the
soil which is one of the most important
goals for us in our gardens are is to
improve the organic matter content in
the soil so that's going to be in the
fall we want to have the leaves that
fall from the trees and the plants we
want them to be incorporated back into
the soil just like nature does it right
every fall we want to bring composting
every year a couple of years and things
like that so stones stop all of this
process from happening and they just
they stopped the whole nutrient cycling
and organic matter replenishment process
in the soil but there is one time that I
did I use rocks and it's called rock
mulching for some reason which to me
just sounds like mulching with rocks but
it's not what it is is it some oh that's
a nice lie lock right there I guess it
doesn't look as cool on camera I hadn't
noticed that yet sorry I got distracted
so so rock mulching is when we usually
around a very important new plant like a
young fruit tree or something that we
have you make sure you you know have a
nice bed around the tree put down a
bunch of leaves like a few inches of
leaves in that bed and then put some
rocks on top not little rocks but like
bigger rocks or flag stones which I
done and I'll hear I can show you
because I've done it to a pear tree here
and I'll actually show you that because
I was recording this yesterday in a
video for the Academy so I'll show you
the process of from start to finish so
what happens is first you make sure the
bed is good and then you put this nice
layer of leaves in there a few inches of
leaves then you cover it up with rocks
and what happens is normally those
leaves would take you know 6 to 8 months
to break down something like that but
with the rocks on there it happens in a
couple of months and what that means is
that I can add another few inches of
leaves in a couple of months and I can
do that a few times this year and that's
really where you get the benefits is by
doing this a few times in the year so
the rocks really it's like they're it's
like they're almost making this these
leaves compost much more quickly
improving the organic matter content of
the soil and people have proposed
different reasons why the rocks might do
that you know it could be that that just
the pressure exerted on the leaves is
gets them more in contact with the soil
food web and with earthworms and allows
them to break down faster it could be
that the rocks offer protection for
earthworms because there's certainly an
explosion of earthworms under there once
these rocks get on there it could be
that they you know the heat that the
rocks get during the day from the Sun is
radiated back out at night allowing for
more of a smooth a longer break down by
the soil food web and just more heat in
there so there's there's a longer work
day for them could be that there's
there's definitely gonna be more
moisture in there with the rocks there
to hold the moisture in so it's probably
all of these reasons together I'm not
sure but I do know that these leaves are
gonna disappear very quickly and what's
going to happen is by the end of this
year when I've done this a few times the
soil is going to be so beautiful under
there full of worm castings and just
it's going to be this deep rich
beautiful soil and I'm expecting that
the top growth is going to be when I've
done this in the past the top growth is
going to be really nice I'm hoping we'll
get some pears this year for the first
time some nice edible pears and so
that's that's rock mulching you know
it's this this way that we use rocks to
help
facilitate the breakdown the fast
breakdown of leaves on a on a very
important tree or if you've planted a
few trees or even a small orchard or
something like that I think that's all I
want to talk about today about rock
mulching oh there's another lie lock huh
I got to start looking around here more
I'm at my parents place so so that's all
so if you haven't picked up my 15 vital
lessons from for becoming a better
organic gardener you can do that at
smilinggardener.com and other than that
I hope you can get doing some rock
mulching you know obviously the fall is
when your your leaves are gonna be there
but uh if you have some leftover like I
did you can start this in the spring and
do it a few times this year so I hope
you have a good rest of the day and I'll
be back next week talking about
something else